---
title: "How to make some MEAN CRUD"
excerpt: "My first dive into MEAN stack."
header: 
    teaser: /assets/images/projects/mean-stack.png
---
[Check it out!](https://github.com/jdstregz/mean-crud-forum)

Hello all. So during my last semester of college I decided to take a class on Secure Web Application Software Development. In this course we do crash sessions on web dev, followed up with topics in security. I've never been much of a web developer up until I decided to start this blog, but that doesn't count too much since I am using a jekyll template for this website. 

One of our projects was to create a forum. The forum would be a simple topic board. In order to view the topics, users would have to create an account. Once authenticated, users can go into topics and view comments. They should also be able to post, update, and delete comments that they have made themselves. Simple enough? We got to choose to build this project using LAMP (Linux, Apache, MySQL, PHP) or MEAN (MongoDB, Express, AngularJS, NodeJS). Obviously, I'm a pretty mean guy.

Well, actually I'm not. I'm completely new to Angular, Express, and Node. After reading tutorial upon tutorial while slugging through this project, I've decided to write a... tell all? Well rather just a very thorough tutorial on how I did this project. While there are a ton of MEAN stack generators out there that were tempting to use, this is all from scratch. 

# The Tutorial - Coming soon...
### Downloading MongoDB
### NodeJS and Dependencies
### The Server
### Topic CRUD and Routes
### User -> Topic
### Passport Authentication
### The Frontend Views + Angular Intro
### The Frontend Controllers + Services
### The Final Product