//---
title: "1 - Introduction to RE&PE"
excerpt: "Reverse Engineering and Penetration Testing - Environment Setup"
author_profile: false
//---
How's it going everyone. So this tutorial series is for those who want to learn the basics of a few topics:
1. Reverse Engineering
2. Penetration Testing
3. Network Security

I may decide to add more to the list, but we are going to start with these three. I don't want to label this as a "how to hack" tutorial set. I won't be teaching modern hacking techniques, but rather fundamental lessons in order to understand higher levels of security engineering. 

I will be starting with reverse engineering, and this introductory post is for environment set up and to refresh your memory of C programming.

## Vagrant

Vagrant is a development environment software. Similar to docker, we can make VM's for all sorts of operating systems. Download Vagrant for your machine:

[Vagrant Downloads](https://www.vagrantup.com/downloads.html)

It is also important to download VirtualBox, which will act as the "VM Provider" for our development machines:

[Virtual Box Downloads](https://www.virtualbox.org/wiki/Downloads)

Once these are both downloaded, open up a terminal and create a folder "Vagrant", this is where your going to keep your vagrant machines.

Enter this directory and let's create our first machine. We are going to start with Ubuntu (Xenial64 Edition):

```bash
$ vagrant init ubuntu/xenial64
```

That command will create a Vagrantfile for you. Vagrant files have configuration details for your "box". We are going to mess around with these configurations later on, but for now let's boot up our box:

```bash
$ vagrant up
```

This will begin the creation process of our new VM. You will see some items for the SSH address and username. Host names can be changed in the Vagrantfile.

To make sure our vagrant machine is up to date:
```bash
$ vagrant box update
```

Now that we have created and updated our vagrant machine, let's enter the machine:
```bash
$ vagrant ssh
```

You should now be in the vagrant machine, which is a mini ubuntu box. To exit out:
```bash
ubuntu@ubuntu-xenial:~$ exit
```

## Changing some configurations

Let's change some configurations in the Vagrant file. You can edit the file using any text editor.

There are a couple lines that are commented out via "#" in the vagrant file. We want to un-comment or change some of these lines. Be sure to un-comment and change the following:

```
Line 40: config.vm.synced_folder "../data", "/vagrant_data"

Line 46 - 52: un-comment loop and change line 51: vb.memory = "2048"

Add the following line (pick a hostname): config.vm.hostname = <whatever>

```

Save and reload the vagrant machine:
```bash
$ vagrant reload
```

Notice: If you are having issues with the following error during vagrant up:
```bash
The guest additions on this VM do not match the install version of
VirtualBox! This may cause things such as forwarded ports, shared
folders, and more to not work properly. If any of those things fail on
this machine, please update the guest additions and repackage the
box.
```
We can fix that by installing a plugin with vagrant plugin:
```bash
$ vagrant plugin install vagrant-vbguest
```
This will allow vagrant up to check and install the correct guest additions module on boot.

## Tool Installation
We will be using some tools for our beginning RE exercises. 

Enter your vagrant machine and download the following packages:
```bash
$ vagrant ssh
# now in vm
$ sudo apt-get update
$ sudo apt-get upgrae
$ sudo apt-get install lsb-core libc6-i386 libc6-dev-i386 build-essential
```

Lots of dependencies will be downloaded. Let's move on to installing radare:
